Project title
================
by Team name

## Summary

For our project, we decided to focus on an issue relating to young
people in recent years. We wanted to focus on the data provided by Youth
Risk behavior Surveillance System(YRBSS), for the Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention (CDC), that monitors the 6 risky behaviors;
violence and injury; substance abuse; tobacco use ; weight problems;
lack of physical activity; and risky sexual behavior. The original data
set we looked at included all these risky behaviors but was inadequate
as there was 13 million data entries from between the years 1991-2017
and across multiple age ranges and American school grades which is a
data set too large to work with in Rstudio therefore, we decided to
focus on 2 risky behavior data sets(Weight Issues & Substance Abuse) in
one school range(Middle School).

The data sets where created on August 29th 2016 and were last updated
March 29th 2019. Therefore the data has a good range across 26 years
period from 1991-2017 so we can visualize and evaluate trends in
substance abuse and weight issues.

We imported the 2 data sheets and scanned over the data to see what
variables can be used to produce interesting graphs, what variables are
useful to us, and how this data proves things that are said media about
these topics.

## Presentation

Our presentation can be found
<https://f2209927ca3c49c386c7f1f6717e6018.app.rstudio.cloud/file_show?path=%2Fcloud%2Fproject%2Fpresentation%2Freveal.js_template%2Fpresentation.html>\]

## Data

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention 2019, *DASH YRBSS - Weight
Control (MS), DASH - Youth Risk Behavior Surveillance System (YRBSS):
Middle School* DASH Public Inquiries, viewed 22 October 2021, data
file(CSV),
<https://chronicdata.cdc.gov/Youth-Risk-Behaviors/DASH-YRBSS-Weight-Control-MS-/xg5u-askg>

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention 2019, *DASH YRBSS - Alcohol
and Other Drug Use (MS), DASH - Youth Risk Behavior Surveillance System
(YRBSS): Middle School* DASH Public Inquiries, viewed 22 October 2021,
data file(CSV),
<https://chronicdata.cdc.gov/Youth-Risk-Behaviors/DASH-YRBSS-Alcohol-and-Other-Drug-Use-MS-/bdg5-rnzz>

#References

Data Set (Substance Abuse):
<https://chronicdata.cdc.gov/Youth-Risk-Behaviors/DASH-YRBSS-Alcohol-and-Other-Drug-Use-MS-/bdg5-rnzz>,

Data Set (Weight Issues):
<https://chronicdata.cdc.gov/Youth-Risk-Behaviors/DASH-YRBSS-Weight-Control-MS-/xg5u-askg>,
